# Resource consumption
The three types of resources that are potentially consumed by users are CPU, NET, and RAM. To learn about what each of these resources are, see the [key concepts](https://developers.eos.io/manuals/eosio.contracts/latest/key-concepts/index) section of the developers.eos.io documentation.

CPU and NET costs are always associated with a specfic transaction. Increasingly, these costs are covered automatically by authenticators such as [Anchor](https://greymass.com/en/anchor), or decentralized services such as [EOS Power Up](https://eospowerup.io/free) or [Charm](https://charm.chintai.io/), rather than by users directly renting their own resources through [Power Up](https://eosauthority.com/power?network=eos). Users of the EPN should expect to cover their CPU & NET resources through one of these existing strategies.

RAM, on the other hand, is a resource whose consumption persists beyond the time-boundary of an individual transaction. The consumption lasts as long as the data persists on-chain, and it is worthwhile to think carefully about who is responsible to pay for the RAM consumption at each step in the process from creating, to siging, to servicing a payment contract.

## Drafting a payment contract
When drafting a payment contract, RAM is consumed to pay for the cost of storing the payment contract draft in a multi-index table in RAM.

In this case, it is reasonable to expect the drafter to cover all RAM costs. This cost helps prevent any spam payment contracts from being stored on-chain, as drafters will only submit and cover the costs for payment contracts whose value exceeds the cost of the resources to make it.

## Signing a payment contract
When signing a payment contract, RAM is consumed to store all details associated with the signed payment contract beyond what was already stored by the draft action.

Depending on the type of payment contract, it may be reasonable to assume that either the drafter or the signer will cover the RAM cost for signing a payment contract. For example, in a subscription contract, the drafter is the organization offering a subscription product or service. In such a scenario, the organization may want to cover some or all of the transaction costs on behalf of the user to eliminate as much of the friction as possible in soliciting subscribers. However, in a donation contract, the drafter may be a non-profit with no expectation of returns and therefore no revenue with which to cover transactons. In this scenario, it would be reasonable to expect the signer to pay RAM costs.

Therefore, both options ought to be possible. To achieve this, at the time a payment contract is drafted, the drafter may select whether any additional RAM requirements will be paid for by the signer or subsidized by the drafter.

## Servicing a payment contract
Although the action to service a payment contract is not a protected action and may be initiated by anyone, the EPN system smart contract may not service the payment contract if the conditions have not been met. However if the conditions have been met, then the EPN system smart contract will facilitate the execution of the terms of the payment contract. 

When servicing a payment contract, existing rows in multi-index tables may be updated, but no new rows shall be added, therefore no RAM is consumed. The only resource costs are the CPU and NET required to execute the transaction. The elected EOS Power Network operators will be responsible for executing the transactions to facilitate the execution of all managed payment contracts. The CPU and NET costs, therefore, will be handled by these operators. It is intended that the operators recieve a portion of the revenue generated by the EOS Power Network in part to reimburse their expenses incurred by executing these transactions and covering the CPU and NET costs for the users.
